:author: Prabhu Ramachandran
:email: prabhu@aero.iitb.ac.in
:institution: Department of Aerospace Engineering
:institution: IIT Bombay, Mumbai, India
:corresponding:

:video: https://youtu.be/6UnuPhTPdnM


--------------------------------------------------------------------
Spreading the Adoption of Python in India: the FOSSEE Python Project
--------------------------------------------------------------------

.. class:: abstract

    The FOSSEE (Free Open Source Software for Science and Engineering
    Education) project (http://fossee.in) is funded by the Ministry of Human
    Resources and Development, MHRD, (http://mhrd.gov.in) of the Government of
    India.  The FOSSEE project is based out of IIT Bombay and the goal of the
    project is to eliminate the use of proprietary tools in the college
    curriculum.  FOSSEE promotes various open source packages.  Python is one
    of them.

    In this paper, the Python-related activities and initiatives of FOSSEE are
    discussed.  The group focuses on promoting the use of Python in the
    college curriculum.  The important activities of this group include the
    creation of spoken-tutorials on Python, the creation of 400+ IPython-based
    textbook companions, an online testing tool for a variety of programming
    languages, a course akin to software carpentry at IIT Bombay, the
    organization of the SciPy India conference, and finally spreading the
    adoption of Python in schools and colleges.  The paper discusses how these
    tools may be used to teach Python in the context of collegiate education
    and computational science.

Introduction
-------------

The FOSSEE project (http://fossee.in) started in 2009 with the goal of helping
minimize the use of proprietary software in the college curriculum in India.
The project is funded by the Ministry of Human Resources and Development, MHRD
(http://mhrd.gov.in) of the Government of India.  FOSSEE is part of the MHRD's
National Mission on Education through ICT (NMEICT).  NMEICT started in 2009 as
an initiative to improve the quality of education in India.  As part of this
mission there have been several initiatives.  One important example is the
NPTEL project (http://nptel.ac.in) which provides content for over 900 courses
at the undergraduate and graduate level (400 web-based and 500 video-based)
online.  These are proving to be extremely useful all over the country.  Other
projects include the Spoken Tutorial project (http://spoken-tutorial.org)
which has also been previously presented at SciPy 2014 [kmm14]_.  FOSSEE is
one such project that is the outcome of the NMEICT funding.

The FOSSEE project is based out of IIT Bombay and promotes the use of various
open source packages in order to help eliminate the use of proprietary
packages in the curriculum.  A large number of colleges tend to unnecessarily
purchase commercial licenses when they really do not need it.  The difficulty
with using commercial packages to teach basic concepts and computational
techniques is well known:

- The packages are typically expensive, the money could be better spent on
  equipment.  This is especially relevant in India.

- Students cannot legally take the software with them home or after they
  complete their course.

- Academic licenses are not enough as the students end up becoming dependent
  on the packages after the leave the institution.  Furthermore, the packages
  are even more expensive when used in a commercial setting.

In order to help reduce the dependence on commercial packages, the FOSSEE
project's efforts are focused towards training students and teachers to use
FOSS tools for their curricular activities.  This also requires development
efforts in order to either enhance existing projects or fill in any areas
where FOSS tools are lacking.  There are around ten PIs actively involved in
various sub-projects.  Some of the most active projects are Scilab, Python,
eSim (an Electronic Design Automation tool), OpenFOAM, and Osdag (open source
design of steel structures).

After the initial efforts in 2009 and 2010 it was found that some of the
initiatives worked and scaled up well whereas others did not.  As a result,
all of the FOSSEE sub-projects follow a similar structure.  Typically
each sub-project produces the following output:

- Generates "spoken-tutorials" that new users can use to self-learn a
  particular software package.

- Organize a crowd-sourced development of "textbook companions" for popular
  textbooks used in the curriculum.  A textbook companion is created by coding
  every solved example in a text using a particular open source software
  package like Scilab or Python.

- Support user questions on a forum for the packages that are promoted.

- Develop new software that is useful in a particular domain.

- Support hardware interfacing to encourage open experimentation.

- Migrate labs that use proprietary packages and help them switch to a FOSS
  equivalent.

- Conduct workshops and conferences to spread the word and teach students and
  teachers.

Some of these are project specific.  For example, the Scilab project is able
to perform lab migrations as Scilab is a close equivalent to Matlab and this
makes it easier for people to switch to it from Matlab.  Kannnan Moudgalya's
paper in 2014 [kmm14]_ discusses in detail the approach and design decisions
made by the FOSSEE and spoken-tutorials projects.  In particular the paper
discusses spoken tutorials, textbook companions, and lab migrations.

The focus of the present paper is to elucidate some the Python-specific
activities [FOSSEE-Python]_ that are of potential direct interest to the SciPy
community.  The overarching goal of the Python related activities is to help
spread the use of Python in the curriculum.  In 2016, the scope has expanded
to help spread the use of Python in high-schools as well.  The focus of this
paper is to discuss the approaches that have been taken by the FOSSEE-Python
group towards these goals.  The lessons and approaches taken by this project
are potentially of benefit for similar projects around the world.

The paper starts by discussing spoken tutorials, which are carefully created
screencasts that are well suited for self learning.  The paper then discusses
a variant of the software carpentry course that has been offered at IIT
Bombay.  The subsequent section discusses a convenient tool called Yaksh for
assessing programming skills of students.  The approach taken to create a
large amount of user-created documentation in the form of "textbook
companions" is then discussed.  The paper concludes with some brief
information about the SciPy India conference series which is organized by
FOSSEE and how that fits in with the overarching theme.


Spoken-tutorials
----------------

When the project started in 2009, many live workshops were conducted to teach
Python but this proved to be too time consuming and did not scale.  There are
more than 3000 colleges in the country and live workshops cannot reach all of
these institutions.  At this time it was felt that preparing self-learning
material that students can learn on their own would be much more effective and
scalable.  A sister project, the spoken-tutorial project
(http://spoken-tutorial.org) pioneered the generation and dissemination of
spoken-tutorials.  A spoken tutorial is basically a carefully designed
screencast for a roughly 10 minute duration or less.  Any screencast cannot
qualify as a spoken-tutorial.  A spoken tutorial requires a carefully written
script.  Notably, a spoken tutorial should be made such that a novice can
understand it.  The spoken-tutorial project ensures that all new tutorials
undergo a novice check to make sure that this is indeed the case.  This
involves asking a novice to go over the script and ensure that they are able
to reproduce the entire script and follow it.  This carefully written script
allows a spoken tutorial to be dubbed into multiple languages.  A series of
spoken tutorials can thus be used to effectively teach a programming language
or software package.  As such, a spoken tutorial is not a substitute for
classroom instruction of the traditional kind.  It has been most effectively
used to teach a programming language or introduce a software package.

The major advantage of the spoken tutorial is that it retains a high quality
of instruction, can be used for self-learning, and scales extremely well.  In
addition, these tutorials can be dubbed into various local languages.  The
spoken tutorial project has trained over a million students and teachers on a
variety of software packages.  The project hosts over 700 individual
spoken-tutorials.  Over 20 different Indian languages are supported.

As part of the Python initiative the FOSSEE Python group has created about 40
spoken tutorials to teach non-CSE undergraduate students how to use Python for
their curricular computational tasks.  A new set of around 50 tutorials is
currently being recorded.  The spoken tutorials include tutorials on starting
with IPython, plotting with matplotlib, etc.  Currently these are only
available in `English
<http://spoken-tutorial.org/tutorial-search/?search_language=English&search_foss=Python&page=1>`_.

Fig. :ref:`fig:py-st` shows a typical Python spoken tutorial as hosted on the
spoken-tutorial website.  It shows the main screencast video.  Below the video
is an outline of the tutorial.  Information on installation and other
instructions is also listed.  Users can easily navigate to prerequisite
tutorials.  In addition, users can post their questions on the forum.

.. figure:: python_spoken_tutorial.png
   :alt: Python spoken tutorials on the spoken-tutorial.org website.

   An example of a Python spoken tutorial.  The video can be viewed, an
   outline of the material is available below the video.  An instruction sheet
   and installation sheet is also available.  Prerequisite videos are listed
   and users can also post questions on a forum. :label:`fig:py-st`

These spoken tutorials can be accessed by anyone and can also be downloaded
into a self-contained CD by users.  Around 40000 users have gone over this
material.  Detailed statistics for the various tutorials are available here:
http://spoken-tutorial.org/statistics/training/

The FOSSEE team generates the spoken tutorials and the spoken tutorial team
coordinates the conduct of workshops where students use this material to teach
themselves Python.  FOSSEE staff members support these workshops by attending
to user questions that may arise.

Spoken tutorials have thus become an effective way to scale up training on
open source packages.  For a motivated and skilled user, spoken-tutorials and
documentation alone are often enough to self-learn.  However, this is not
enough for the average user.  There are many software packages, tools, web
sites and books related to computational science.  It is never easy for a
student (undergraduate or graduate) to choose the right set of packages or
practices they should follow.  The next section discusses a course that is
designed and run by the FOSSEE group at IIT Bombay that helps address this.

The SDES course
----------------

SDES is an acronym that stands for Software Development Techniques for
Engineers and Scientists.  As discussed earlier, the Python group initially
focused on teaching Python at various colleges.  It was soon felt that
students needed to learn how to use Unix shells effectively, use version
control, basic knowledge of LaTeX, good software development practices in
addition to Python.  Students are often unaware of the right set of tools to
learn.  Most students undergo a basic computer programming course in their
first year but this is rarely enough for them to perform their curricular
tasks.

In order to fill this need, a course was designed in late 2009.  The course is
titled Software Development techniques for Engineers and Scientists (SDES).
This course takes inspiration from the Software Carpentry Course material
[SWC]_.  However, the course is tailored for undergraduate students.  The
course is offered at IIT Bombay so students at the undergraduate and graduate
levels could take this as part of their course-work.  Students can certainly
learn this material from several online resources, however, the existence of
this course allows students to credit this as part of their course
requirements.

The course starts with teaching students on how to use Unix command line tools
to carry out common (mostly text processing) tasks.  The course then goes on
to teach students how to automate typical tasks using basic shell-scripting.
The students are then taught version control.  The course originally used
mercurial_, however, this has changed to git_.  The students are then taught
basic and advanced Python.  The emphasis is on typical engineering/numerical
computations such as those that involve (basic) manipulation of large arrays
in an efficient manner.  Good programming style is discussed along with
debugging and test driven development.  They also learn LaTeX and document
creation with reStructuredText_.  The course material is available from
github, at http://github.com/FOSSEE/sees.

As part of the evaluation, students pick a software project and attempt to
apply all that they have learned.  Students are also given many programming
assignments to test their ability to program.  We have built a convenient
online testing tool called Yaksh that is discussed in a subsequent section for
this task.  This makes the examinations interesting for students and is
helpful for instructors to assess student's understanding.

.. _mercurial: https://www.mercurial-scm.org
.. _git: https://git-scm.com/
.. _reStructuredText: http://docutils.sourceforge.net/rst.html

The course has been offered twice thus far and will be offered again in the
fall of 2016.  The course has been well received by students and is quite
popular.  The number of students is restricted to about 60 each time.  During
the last delivery it was felt that the student projects were not done well
enough.  A more aggressive and systematic approach is needed to push students
to work consistently over the duration of the course, rather than in the last
minute.  It was also found that it is difficult for students and instructors
to pick meaningful projects that are neither too trivial or too difficult.
For the next delivery, the plan is to encourage students to work
systematically on their projects.  Studying the git logs of the student
project repositories to assess team contribution and systematic work is one
approach that is being considered.  Instead of always picking new projects,
one possibility is to give them an existing project and ask them to improve
it.

The SDES course was offered as part of a 1000 teacher training course offered
in 2011 at IIT Bombay.  This course had over 600 participants who took the
course and was well received.  Unfortunately, it is not clear how well this
course eventually helped teachers and if the teachers went on to teach this
material in their colleges.

Teaching the course has generally been enjoyable and rewarding.  Students seem
to find the course useful and generally continue to use the tools that they
have learned.  The course is rather demanding from the perspective of
assessment and a good team of TAs is necessary.  Fortunately, the FOSSEE
Python team helps in this regard.


Online test tool: Yaksh
------------------------

Assessing the programming skills of students is a very important task during
training.  This is necessary both from the perspective of effective teaching
as well as learning.  For an instructor, testing early and often is helpful
because it provides immediate feedback on which students need help and which
of them are doing well.  For students, doing well in a test gives them
confidence and doing poorly teaches them where they should concentrate harder
or get help.  Unfortunately, assessment is not usually a pleasant task.
Assessment is doubly important when learning a programming language as in
India there are students who learn how to program but never write more than a
few lines of code.  Programming requires practice and encouraging students to
program is very important.

For FOSSEE this is also important from the perspective of being able to
certify students.  The Spoken Tutorial team conducts a large number of
workshops all over the country and it would be good if the tests required that
students be able to write simple programs at least.

In 2011, the author saw Chris Boesch run a `programming contest
<http://singpath.com>`_ at PyCon APAC 2011.  The contest was entirely online,
and users could submit their code and obtained instant feedback.  The system
was built on top of Google App Engine.  This made testing programming lively
and enjoyable.  The author along with the FOSSEE team have built a Django_
application to do something similar.  The package is called Yaksh_, is Open
Source, and the sources are available at http://github.com/FOSSEE/online_test.
The initial version of Yaksh was used to administer programming quizzes for
the online teacher training course based on the SDES course in late 2011.
More than 600 simultaneous users took their tests on this interface.  This
work was presented at SciPy India 2011 [PR11]_.

Yaksh provides a simple interface for an instructor to create a question paper
with mutiple-choice questions (MCQ) as well as full-fledged programming
questions.  A programming question consists of a problem statement and the
user writes the code on the interface.  This code is immediately checked
against several test cases and any failures are reported directly to the user
by providing a suitable traceback.  By design, a programming question can be
answered many times until the user gets it completely correct.  This
encourages students to try and submit their answers.  An MCQ can only be
answered once for obvious reasons.

It was found that the approach of allowing multiple submissions and providing
instant feedback instead of the traditional approach where a student would
upload the answers on an interface and obtain the grades later to be much more
effective.  Instant feedback makes the process lively and entertaining for the
student.  The ability to submit multiple times gives them comfort in that they
know that they can gradually fix their code.  This makes students less
anxious.  They also immediately know that their answer is correct if they get
it right.  This makes a significant difference.  Clearly this is not enough to
teach all aspects of programming, however, this is a very useful aid.

Yaksh provides a convenient monitoring interface for the instructor which
provides, at a glance, information on the students' performance.  Each
submission of a student is logged and can be seen by the moderator.  This is
useful for an instructor.

Yaksh works best with Python since it has been used mostly for Python tests
but does support multiple other programming languages like C, C++, Java, Bash,
and Scilab.

Yaksh sandboxes the user code and runs the code as "nobody" when configured to
do so.  The code execution can also be performed in a docker container.  This
minimizes any damage a student can do.  Since all answers are logged before
execution, it is easy to find out if a student has been malicious -- this has
never happened in the current usage Yaksh.


.. figure:: yaksh_login.png
   :alt: Yaksh login screen.

   The Yaksh application login screen with a video on how one can use
   it. :label:`fig:yaksh-login`

.. figure:: yaksh-mcq.png
   :alt: Yaksh interface for an MCQ question.

   The interface for a multiple-choice question on
   yaksh. :label:`fig:yaksh-mcq`

.. figure:: yaksh-code.png
   :alt: Yaksh interface for a programming question.

   The interface for a programming question on yaksh. :label:`fig:yaksh-code`

.. figure:: yaksh_monitor.png
   :alt: Yaksh interface for monitoring student progress.

   The moderator interface for monitoring student progress during an exam on
   yaksh. :label:`fig:yaksh-monitor`

Fig. :ref:`fig:yaksh-login` shows the login screen for Yaksh, which features a
small video that demonstrates how the interface can be used.
Fig. :ref:`fig:yaksh-mcq` shows the interface for an MCQ and
Fig. :ref:`fig:yaksh-code` shows the interface for a programming question.
The top bar shows the time remaining to take the question.  A question
navigator is provided for students to quickly move between questions.

Fig. :ref:`fig:yaksh-monitor` shows a typical moderator interface while
monitoring a running quiz.  The interface shows the number of questions each
student has completed.  On clicking on a user, all the answers they have
submitted are visible.


Installation and running a demo
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Yaksh is a Python package and is distributed on PyPI_.  Yaksh can be installed
with pip.  When installed, an executable script ``yaksh`` is created.  To setup
a demo instance on can run ::

  $ yaksh create_demo

This creates a new demo Django project called ``yaksh_demo`` with a demo
database and a couple of users added.  One is a moderator and other is an
examinee.  It also loads a few simple demo questions and a quiz.  One can then
simply run::

  $ yaksh run_demo
  $ sudo yaksh run_code_server

This starts up a server on the ``localhost`` and also runs the code evaluator
as nobody.  The server is tested to work on Linux and OS X but not on Windows
although technically it should not be difficult to do this.  Note that a
malicious user could fork bomb the machine in this case as the service is
still running on the machine.  Resource limiting is possible but not currently
implemented.

The above instructions are only for a demo and are not suitable for a
production installation as a sqlite database is used in the demo case.  More
detailed instructions for a production installation are available in the
repository.

Design overview
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order to create a quiz the teacher/instructor (also called the moderator)
must first create a course.  Users can login and register for the course with
the instructor's approval.  The moderator can add any number of questions to
yaksh through the online interface.  These can be either MCQ questions or
programming questions.  The programming questions will require a set of test
cases.  In the case of a Python programming question, a simple question could
be of the form::

  Write a function called factorial(n) which takes
  a single integer argument and returns the
  factorial of the number given.

The question will also be accompanied with a few test cases of the form::


  assert factorial(0) == 1
  assert factorial(1) == 1
  assert factorial(5) == 120

As many questions as desired may be created.  For other languages assertions
are not easily possible but standard input/output based questions are easily
handled.  More sophisticated test support is also possible (for example one
could easily support some form of assertions for C/C++ if a template were used
to generate the files).  The architecture of yaksh supports this fairly
easily.

Questions could also be imported from a Python script.  The interface lets
users export and import questions.  The moderator then creates a quiz and an
associated question paper.  A quiz may have a pre-requisite quiz and can have
a passing criterion.  Quizzes have active durations and each question paper
will have a particular time within which it must be completed.  For example
one could conduct a 15 minute quiz with a 30 minute activity window.  The
students can be allowed to attempt the quiz either once or multiple times as
desired.  This is often useful when teaching new users.  Questions are
automatically graded.  A user either gets the full marks or zero if the tests
fail.  In the future yaksh will also support partial grading depending on the
number of test cases the code passes.

In terms of the internal design, yaksh is fairly simple.

- The Django app manages the questions, quizzes, users etc.

- A separate code-server process runs as "nobody" to limit the amount of
  damage malicious code could have.  This process runs an XML/RPC server.  The
  Django app creates an XML/RPC ``ServerProxy`` instance and invokes the code
  server with the user code and any additional data (like the test cases
  etc.).  This is executed by the server process.

- Unfortunately, XML/RPC can only handle 2 simultaneous connections.
  Therefore, a pool of these servers is created and managed.  The Django app
  then connects to any available server and executes the code.

- In order to prevent issues with infinite loops, we use the ``signal`` module
  to send ``SIGALRM`` in a finite amount of time.  The default is 2 seconds
  but this can be easily configured.

The code server can be easily run within a docker container and this is also
supported by Yaksh.  Some documentation for this is also provided in the
`production README
<https://github.com/FOSSEE/online_test/blob/master/README_production.md>`_.


In addition to these features yaksh also has an experimental web-API that
allows an instructor to utilize yaksh from their own web sites or HTML
documents.  An instructor could create questions and a question paper from the
yaksh interface but have users take the test on say an Jupyter notebook
interface.  This is still being developed but a proof of concept is available.
In order to do this, a user could simply add ``yaksh.js`` to their HTML and
call a few API methods to fetch as well as submit user answers.

.. _PyPI: http://pypi.python.org
.. _Yaksh: https://github.com/FOSSEE/online_test


Some experiences using yaksh
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Yaksh has been used while delivering the SDES course at IIT Bombay.  This has
worked quite well and is well received by students.  As mentioned before,
Yaksh has also been used for the online course with over 600 participants and
worked quite well.  This was however done in 2011 and thereafter has only been
used for smaller classes.

Recently, Yaksh was used by the author to teach first year undergraduate
students Python as part of a data analysis and interpretation course.  Many
students were new to programming and a lot was learned about how well this
could work.

Yaksh definitely made it much easier to assess the understanding of students.
Initially the students were not given tests but were given Jupyter notebooks
as well as exercises to solve at home.  The assumption was that the students
would follow the material since it was done slowly in class.  This was not the
case.  A take-home assignment was given using Yaksh where students would solve
simple problems (many taken from the exercise problems that were already
given).  Surprisingly, many of the students were struggled badly.  Even the
best students were not able to finish all problems.  This showed that a lot
more practice was needed.  As a result, 7 different quizzes with a few
problems each were conducted.  After about 5 such quizzes it was found that
some students were still having difficulties understanding basic concepts.
These were students who were completely new to programming.  Around 20 poorly
performing students were identified.  These students came to a special class
and solved 10 problems using yaksh over the course of 2 hours.  The monitoring
facility was immensely useful as one could walk over to a struggling student
and provide assistance or point a TA in their direction.  The students all
seemed to like the experience and understood the importance of actually
programming versus learning the language syntax.  Their performance in the
subsequent quizzes and assignments improved significantly.

One major lesson learned was that one should ensure that students are tested
from the get-go rather than towards the end.  This would result in a much
smoother experience.  Based on the overall experience, it is clear that Yaksh
is an effective tool for students and teachers alike.

Plans
~~~~~~

Yaksh will continue to be improved based on the needs of the FOSSEE team and
that of others.  It is hoped that this is also of use to the community.  The
future goals for the yaksh project are to:

- Clean up and come up with a stable web-API.
- Support the use of Jupyter notebooks for tests.
- Support more programming languages.
- Integrate Yaksh into the spoken-tutorial website in order to help them test
  students.


Textbook companions
--------------------

Spoken-tutorials allow FOSSEE to reach out to a larger audience and train
students and teachers on the use of FOSS tools and packages.  The SDES course
is similar to the Software Carpentry effort and offers a full-fledged course
that readies students for computational science.  Yaksh facilitates both of
these by making it easier to test students on their programming skills.

While Python in general and the SciPy project in particular have plenty of
good online documentation, this may not always be adequate from the
perspective of a beginner.  Good quality documentation is not easy to write
and requires both expertise as well as the ability to explain things at the
level of the user.  This is often difficult for a developer who knows almost
everything about the package.  On the other hand it is not always easy for an
inexperienced user to write documentation either.

Students are often interested in taking internships and desire to participate
in software projects that are relevant to their area of interest.  Is it
possible to engage these students in a way where they are able to contribute
meaningful documentation in an area of their interest?

Textbook companions offer an interesting approach in this context.  As
discussed in detail in [kmm14]_, textbook companions are created by writing
Python code for every solved example in a textbook.  Students create these
textbook companions which are then reviewed by either teachers or reviewers at
FOSSEE.  This task scales very well as students are eager to take up the task.
They already know the subject matter as the textbook is part of their
curriculum.  The examples are already solved, so they have to convert the
solved example into appropriate Python code.  Students are given an honorarium
and a certificate after their textbooks pass a review.  Currently, there are
over 530 Scilab textbook companions [STC]_ created. The Python project has 416
completed books with over 200 textbooks in progress.  The Python textbook
companions are hosted online at http://tbc-python.fossee.in

The Python Textbook Companions (PTC's) are submitted in the form of IPython
notebooks.  This is important for several reasons:

- IPython notebooks allow one to put together formatted HTML, code, and the
  results in one self-contained file.
- IPython notebooks are easy to render and a HTML listing can be generated.
- The file can also be hosted online and interactively used.
- The huge popularity of the notebook makes this a very useful resource.

The FOSSEE group has also customized the generated HTML such that users can
leave comments on the IPython notebooks.  This is done by linking disqus
comments to each rendered notebook.  The disqus API is then queried for any
new comments each day and contributors are sent a consolidated email about any
potential comments for them to address.  This feature is relatively new and
needs more user testing.

The submission process and hosting of the IPython notebooks is done using a
Django_ web application that can be seen at http://tbc-python.fossee.in.  The
code for the interface is also available from github
(https://github.com/FOSSEE/Python-TBC-Interface).  Once a textbook is reviewed
it is also committed to a git repository on github:
https://github.com/FOSSEE/Python-Textbook-Companions.

The process works as follows:

1. The student picks a few possible textbooks that have not been completed and
   informs the textbook companion coordinator.
2. Once a particular book is assigned to the contributor, the student submits
   one sample chapter which is reviewed by the coordinator.
3. The student then completes the entire book.  Each chapter is submitted as
   a separate IPython notebook.
4. The student also uploads a few screenshots of their favorite notebooks
   that are displayed on the interface.
5. The submitted code is reviewed and any corrections are made by the
   contributor.
6. The notebooks are then committed to the git repository.
7. The completed notebooks are hosted by the TBC web application.

After the textbook is reviewed and accepted the student is sent an honorarium
for their work.  Fig. :ref:`fig:tbc-main` shows the main Python TBC interface
with information about the project and the editor's picks.

Approximately 3 proposals for new textbooks are submitted each week.  Of
these, around one is rejected if the book is either a programming language
book or it is already completed.  Initially many proposals were C or C++
programming books which were being converted to Python.  This has since been
discontinued and such books are no longer accepted.  Of the submissions,
around 70% of the submissions are from males, 40% of the submissions are by
students, another 40% from teachers, and the remaining 20% from working
professionals.

.. figure:: python_tbc_main.png
   :alt: The main landing page for the Python TBC site.

   The Django application which hosts the Python textbook
   companions. :label:`fig:tbc-main`


Fig. :ref:`fig:tbc-text` shows a typical textbook.  The IPython notebooks for
each chapter can be viewed or downloaded.  More information on the book itself
can be seen including an ISBN search link for the student to learn more about
a book, a link to the actual IPython notebook on github and other details are
also available.  The entire book can be downloaded as a ZIP file.

.. figure:: tbc_textbook.png
   :alt: A typical textbook shown on the TBC interface.

   A typical textbook is shown.  The figure shows some screenshots to pique
   the interest of the casual reader.  The Jupyter notebook corresponding to
   each chapter is listed and can be viewed or
   downloaded. :label:`fig:tbc-text`

Upon clicking a chapter, a typical rendered HTML file is seen.  This is seen
in Fig. :ref:`fig:tbc-render`.  A button to edit the chapter is seen, this
will fire up a tmpnb_ instance which allows users to easily modify and run the
code.  This makes it convenient to view, modify, and learn the created
content.  In the figure, one can see an icon for entering comments.  This
links to a disqus comment field at the bottom of the page.  This lists all
current comments and allows users to submit new comments on the particular
chapter.

.. figure:: tbc_render.png
   :alt: A rendered textbook chapter.

   A typical textbook chapter being rendered.  The button to edit examples of
   the chapter fires up a tmpnb_ instance so users can edit the code and try
   their changes. :label:`fig:tbc-render`


A large number of solved examples are indeed quite simple but there are
several that are fairly involved.  Some of the nicer textbooks are highlighted
in the editor's pick section.

The Python textbook companion effort of FOSSEE has not been formally announced
and advertised in the wider SciPy community.  Once announced, the plan is to
start to analyze the usage and popularity of this resource.  It is still
unclear as to how different people are using the notebooks.  Some good
feedback has been received from the contributors [testimonials]_ to the
project.  Many of them have enjoyed creating these notebooks and have
benefited by this effort.  Some contributor comments are quoted in [kmm14]_.

.. _tmpnb:  https://github.com/jupyter/tmpnb
.. _Django: https://www.djangoproject.com/

In summary, the textbook companions are of interest because:

1. They provide ready-to-use examples of how to apply a given software package
   or set of tools to a particular problem.
2. They scale well and can be easily crowd-sourced.
3. The scale of the current effort allows one to ask interesting questions,
   for example "what are the different uses of the FFT in science and
   engineering?".
4. It provides an interesting alternative to internships and projects for
   undergraduate students looking to learn and contribute something
   meaningful.

The texbook companions thus complement the other initiatives of the
FOSSEE-Python group.


Scipy India
------------

The SciPy India conference provides an opportunity for those interested in
Python to learn of new developments, talk about how they have used Python,
meet other interested users/developers and participate in the community.

The Python FOSSEE group has been organizing the SciPy India conference
since 2009.  Seven conferences have been organized thus far.  The conferences
have traditionally been held in December.  They are largely funded by the
FOSSEE project.  The project staff manage the local organization almost
completely.  The conference website is at http://scipy.in

There is an attendance of about 200 people each year.  A large number of these
are new users.  The conference is typically well received and many people are
aware of the SciPy community through these efforts.  Each year a leading
expert in the community is invited to keynote at the conference.  The first
conference had Travis Oliphant keynote and the conference in 2015 had Andreas
Kloeckner as the keynote.  Several other important members of the extended
SciPy community from India and abroad have spoken at the conference.

Originally, sprints were conducted but this did not prove very effective.  The
conference now focuses on high-quality tutorials for two days and a single day
for the conference itself.  Many college professors attend the conference and
many go back and encourage their students to use the tools and participate in
the future.


Plans for the future
---------------------

The Python group plans to build on the existing work.  The team will continue
to generate textbook companions, provide support for the workshops conducted
by the spoken-tutorial team, and continue to work on the Yaksh interface.  The
existing Python spoken tutorials will be updated and new ones will be created
as required.  These spoken tutorials will also be dubbed to other Indian
languages.

In addition the Python group plans to promote the use of Python in the CBSE
(Central Board of Secondary Education) school curriculum.  The CBSE board has
already included Python as an alternative to C++ in the 11th and 12th grade
exams.  Unfortunately, there is quite a bit of resistance towards this as many
teachers are unfamiliar with Python.  The plan is to support schools in this
initiative over the next year.  Textbook companions will be prepared for the
school initiative.  Spoken-tutorials tailor-made to the school curriculum will
also be generated.  This is an exciting new development but a significant
amount of work is still necessary.

Conclusions
------------

As discussed in this paper, the FOSSEE project has used several interesting
approaches to spread Python in India.  Spoken tutorials help deliver
good-quality self-learning training material to a large audience.  The SDES
course allows students to learn effective computational skills as part of
their curriculum.  Yaksh is an open source tool that can be used to
effectively test the programming skills of a student.  Together, these tools
and materials maybe be effectively used by instructors to teach computational
tools and programming to a large number of students.  The author's experience
with using Yaksh while teaching students at different levels has also been
shared.  It seems that testing students often on their programming is an
effective way to have them practice their programming skills and provide quick
feedback to the instructor.

Textbook companions offer an interesting alternative to documentation and
scales well.  The very fact that FOSSEE has helped facilitate around 500+
textbook companions shows that this activity scales and has potential to make
a difference.

The FOSSEE Python group has helped spread the use of Python in India.  The
group has also helped the other sister FOSSEE groups with respect to any
Python related support when possible.  It is hoped that the code and other
material that has been generated is of use to the wider community across the
world.


Acknowledgments
----------------

FOSSEE would not exist but for the continued support of MHRD and we are
grateful to them for this.  The project would not be a success without the
efforts of the many PIs of the FOSSEE project especially Prof. Kannan
Moudgalya of IIT Bombay who also leads the spoken-tutorial project.  The
author wishes to thank Asokan Pichai who helped shape the FOSSEE project over
the first few years.  This work would not be possible without the efforts of
the many FOSSEE staff members.  The past and present members of the project
are listed here: http://python.fossee.in/about/  the author wishes to thank
them all.  The author wishes to thank the reviewers of this manuscript for
their suggestions that have made this manuscript better.


References
-----------

.. [kmm14] Kannan Moudgalya, Campaign for IT literacy through FOSS and Spoken
    Tutorials, Proceedings of the 13th Python in Science Conference, SciPy,
    July 2014.

.. [FOSSEE-Python] FOSSEE Python group website.  http://python.fossee.in, last
    seen on June 2nd 2016.

.. [STC] Scilab Team at FOSSEE, Scilab textbook companions,
    http://scilab.in/Textbook_Companion_Project, May 2016.

.. [SWC] Greg Wilson.  Software Carpentry, http://software-carpentry.org,
    Seen on May 2016.

.. [PR11] Prabhu Ramachandran.  FOSSEE: Python and Education, Python
    for science and education, Scipy India 2011, 4th-11th December 2011,
    Mumbai India.

.. [testimonials] Python texbook companion testimonials.
    http://python.fossee.in/testimonials/1/ Seen on Jun 1, 2016
