---
title: 'Codebraid Preview for VS Code: Pandoc Markdown Preview with Jupyter Kernels'
description: |
  Codebraid Preview is a VS Code extension that provides a live preview of
  Pandoc Markdown documents with optional support for executing embedded
  code.  Unlike typical Markdown previews, all Pandoc features are fully
  supported because Pandoc itself generates the preview.
---

# Abstract

Codebraid Preview is a VS Code extension that provides a live preview of
Pandoc Markdown documents with optional support for executing embedded
code. Unlike typical Markdown previews, all Pandoc features are fully
supported because Pandoc itself generates the preview. The Markdown source
and the preview are fully integrated with features like bidirectional
scroll sync. The preview supports LaTeX math via KaTeX. Code blocks and
inline code can be executed with Codebraid, using either its built-in
execution system or Jupyter kernels. For executed code, any combination of
the code and its output can be displayed in the preview as well as the
final document. Code execution is non-blocking, so the preview always
remains live and up-to-date even while code is still running.

# Introduction

Pandoc {cite:p}`pandoc` is increasingly a foundational tool for creating
scientific and technical documents. It provides Pandoc’s Markdown and
other Markdown variants that add critical features absent in basic
Markdown, such as citations, footnotes, mathematics, and tables. At the
same time, Pandoc simplifies document creation by providing conversion
from Markdown (and other formats) to formats like LaTeX, HTML, Microsoft
Word, and PowerPoint. Pandoc is especially useful for documents with
embedded code that is executed during the build process. RStudio’s
RMarkdown {cite:p}`rmarkdown` and more recently Quarto {cite:p}`quarto`
leverage Pandoc to convert Markdown documents to other formats, with
code execution provided by knitr {cite:p}`Xie2015`. JupyterLab
{cite:p}`jupyter` centers the writing experience around an interactive,
browser-based notebook instead of a Markdown document, but still relies
on Pandoc for export to formats other than HTML {cite:p}`nbconvert`. There
are also ways to interact with a Jupyter Notebook as a Markdown
document, such as Jupytext {cite:p}`jupytext` and Pandoc’s own native
Jupyter support.

Writing with Pandoc’s Markdown or a similar Markdown variant has
advantages when multiple output formats are required, since Pandoc
provides the conversion capabilities. Pandoc Markdown variants can also
serve as a simpler syntax when creating HTML, LaTeX, or similar
documents. They allow HTML and LaTeX to be intermixed with Markdown
syntax. They also support including raw chunks of text in other formats
such as reStructuredText. When executable code is involved, the
RMarkdown-style approach of Markdown with embedded code can sometimes be
more convenient than a browser-based Jupyter notebook since the writing
process involves more direct interaction with the complete document
source.

While using a Pandoc Markdown variant as a source format brings many
advantages, the actual writing process itself can be less than ideal,
especially when executable code is involved. Pandoc Markdown variants
are so powerful precisely because they provide so many extensions to
Markdown, but this also means that they can only be fully rendered by
Pandoc itself. When text editors such as VS Code provide a built-in
Markdown preview, typically only a small subset of Pandoc features is
supported, so the representation of the document output will be
inaccurate. Some editors provide a visual Markdown editing mode, in
which a partially rendered version of the document is displayed in the
editor and menus or keyboard shortcuts may replace the direct entry of
Markdown syntax. These generally suffer from the same issue. This is
only exacerbated when the document embeds code that is executed during
the build process, since that goes even further beyond basic Markdown.

An alternative is to use Pandoc itself to generate HTML or PDF output,
and then display this as a preview. Depending on the text editor used,
the HTML or PDF might be displayed within the text editor in a panel
beside the document source, or in a separate browser window or PDF
viewer. For example, Quarto offers both possibilities, depending on
whether RStudio, VS Code, or another editor is used.[^rstudio-visual]
While this approach resolves the inaccuracy issues of a basic Markdown
preview, it also gives up features such as scroll sync that tightly
integrate the Markdown source with the preview. In the case of
executable code, there is the additional issue of a time delay in
rendering the preview. Pandoc itself can typically convert even a
relatively long document in under one second. However, when code is
executed as part of the document build process, preview update is
blocked until code execution completes.

[^rstudio-visual]:
    The RStudio editor is unique in also offering a Pandoc-based visual editing
    mode, starting with version 1.4 from January 2021
    (<https://www.rstudio.com/blog/announcing-rstudio-1-4/>).

This paper introduces Codebraid Preview, a VS Code extension that
provides a live preview of Pandoc Markdown documents with optional
support for executing embedded code. Codebraid Preview provides a
Pandoc-based preview while avoiding most of the traditional drawbacks of
this approach. The next section provides an overview of features. This
is followed by sections focusing on scroll sync, LaTeX support, and code
execution as examples of solutions and remaining challenges in creating
a better Pandoc writing experience.

:::{figure} codebraid_preview_screenshot.png
:label: screenshot

Screenshot of a Markdown document with Codebraid Preview in VS Code. This
document uses Codebraid to execute code with Jupyter kernels, so all plots
and math visible in the preview are generated during document build.
:::

# Overview of Codebraid Preview

Codebraid Preview can be installed through the VS Code extension
manager. Development is at
<https://github.com/gpoore/codebraid-preview-vscode>. Pandoc must be
installed separately (<https://pandoc.org/>). For code execution
capabilities, Codebraid must also be installed
(<https://github.com/gpoore/codebraid>).

The preview panel can be opened using the VS Code command palette, or by
clicking the Codebraid Preview button that is visible when a Markdown
document is open. The preview panel takes the document in its current
state, converts it into HTML using Pandoc, and displays the result using
a webview. An example is shown in {ref}`screenshot`. Since the
preview is generated by Pandoc, all Pandoc features are fully supported.

By default, the preview updates automatically whenever the Markdown
source is changed. There is a short user-configurable minimum update
interval. For shorter documents, sub-second updates are typical.

The preview uses the same styling CSS as VS Code’s built-in Markdown
preview, so it automatically adjusts to the VS Code color theme. For
example, changing between light and dark themes changes the background
and text colors in the preview.

Codebraid Preview leverages recent Pandoc advances to provide
bidirectional scroll sync between the Markdown source and the preview
for all CommonMark-based Markdown variants that Pandoc supports
(`commonmark`, `gfm`, `commonmark_x`). By default, Codebraid
Preview treats Markdown documents as `commonmark_x`, which is
CommonMark with Pandoc extensions for features like math, footnotes, and
special list types. The preview still works for other Markdown variants,
but scroll sync is disabled. By default, scroll sync is fully
bidirectional, so scrolling either the source or the preview will cause
the other to scroll to the corresponding location. Scroll sync can
instead be configured to be only from source to preview or only from
preview to source. As far as I am aware, this is the first time that
scroll sync has been implemented in a Pandoc-based preview.

The same underlying features that make scroll sync possible are also
used to provide other preview capabilities. Double-clicking in the
preview moves the cursor in the editor to the corresponding line of the
Markdown source.

Since many Markdown variants support LaTeX math, the preview includes
math support via KaTeX {cite:p}`katex`.

Codebraid Preview can simply be used for writing plain Pandoc documents.
Optional execution of embedded code is possible with Codebraid
{cite:p}`codebraid`, using its built-in code execution system or Jupyter
kernels. When Jupyter kernels are used, it is possible to obtain the
same output that would be present in a Jupyter notebook, including rich
output such as plots and mathematics. It is also possible to specify a
custom display so that only a selected combination of code, stdout,
stderr, and rich output is shown while the rest are hidden. Code
execution is decoupled from the preview process, so the Markdown source
can be edited and the preview can update even while code is running in
the background. As far as I am aware, no previous software for executing
code in Markdown has supported building a document with partial code
output before execution has completed.

There is also support for document export with Pandoc, using the VS Code
command palette or the export-with-Pandoc button.

# Scroll sync

Tight source-preview integration requires a source map, or a mapping
from characters in the source to characters in the output. Due to
Pandoc’s parsing algorithms, tracking source location during parsing is
not possible in the general case.[^pandoc-parse]

[^pandoc-parse]: See for example <https://github.com/jgm/pandoc/issues/4565>.

[Pandoc 2.11.3](https://github.com/jgm/pandoc/releases/tag/2.11.3)
was released in December 2020. It added a `sourcepos` extension for
CommonMark and formats based on it, including GitHub-Flavored Markdown
(GFM) and `commonmark_x` (CommonMark plus extensions similar to
Pandoc’s Markdown). The CommonMark parser uses a different parsing
algorithm from the Pandoc’s Markdown parser, and this algorithm permits
tracking source location. For the first time, it was possible to
construct a source map for a Pandoc input format.

Codebraid Preview defaults to `commonmark_x` as an input format, since
it provides the most features of all CommonMark-based formats. Features
continue to be added to `commonmark_x` and it is gradually nearing
feature parity with Pandoc’s Markdown. Citations are perhaps the most
important feature currently missing.[^commonmark-x-roadmap]

[^commonmark-x-roadmap]:
    The Pandoc Roadmap at <https://github.com/jgm/pandoc/wiki/Roadmap> summarizes
    current `commonmark_x` capabilities.

Codebraid Preview provides full bidirectional scroll sync between source
and preview for all CommonMark-based formats, using data provided by
`sourcepos`. In the output HTML, the first image or inline text
element created by each Markdown source line is given an id attribute
corresponding to the source line number. When the source is scrolled to
a given line range, the preview scrolls to the corresponding HTML
elements using these id attributes. When the preview is scrolled, the
visible HTML elements are detected via the Intersection Observer
API.[^intersection-observer] Then their id attributes are used to
determine the corresponding Markdown line range, and the source scrolls
to those lines.

[^intersection-observer]:
    For technical details, <https://www.w3.org/TR/intersection-observer/>. For
    an overview,
    <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Intersection_Observer_API>.

Scroll sync is slightly more complicated when working with output that
is generated by executed code. For example, if a code block is executed
and creates several plots in the preview, there isn’t necessarily a way
to trace each individual plot back to a particular line of code in the
Markdown source. In such cases, the line range of the executed code is
mapped proportionally to the vertical space occupied by its output.

Pandoc supports multi-file documents. It can be given a list of files to
combine into a single output document. Codebraid Preview provides scroll
sync for multi-file documents. For example, suppose a document is
divided into two files in the same directory, `chapter_1.md` and
`chapter_2.md`. Treating these as a single document involves creating
a YAML configuration file `_codebraid_preview.yaml` that lists the
files:

```yaml
input-files:
  - chapter_1.md
  - chapter_2.md
```

Now launching a preview from either `chapter_1.md` or
`chapter_2.md` will display a preview that combines both files.
When the preview is scrolled, the editor scrolls to the corresponding
source location, automatically switching between `chapter_1.md` and
`chapter_2.md` depending on the part of the preview that is visible.

The preview still works when the input format is set to a non-CommonMark
format, but in that case scroll sync is disabled. If Pandoc adds
`sourcepos` support for additional input formats in the future, scroll
sync will work automatically once Codebraid Preview adds those formats
to the supported list. It is possible to attempt to reconstruct a source
map by performing a parallel string search on Pandoc output and the
original source. This can be error-prone due to text manipulation during
format conversion, but in the future it may be possible to construct a
good enough source map to extend basic scroll sync support to additional
input formats.

# LaTeX support

Support for mathematics is one of the key features provided by many
Markdown variants in Pandoc, including `commonmark_x`. Math support in
the preview panel is supplied by KaTeX {cite:p}`katex`, which is a
JavaScript library for rendering LaTeX math in the browser.

One of the disadvantages of using Pandoc to create the preview is that
every update of the preview is a complete update. This makes the preview
more sensitive to HTML rendering time. In contrast, in a Jupyter
notebook, it is common to write Markdown in multiple cells which are
rendered separately and independently.

MathJax {cite:p}`mathjax` provides a broader range of LaTeX support than
KaTeX, and is used in software such as JupyterLab and Quarto. While
MathJax performance has improved significantly since the release of
version 3.0 in 2019, KaTeX can still have a speed advantage, so it is
currently the default due to the importance of HTML rendering. In the
future, optional MathJax support may be needed to provide broader math
support. For some applications, it may also be worth considering caching
pre-rendered or image versions of equations to improve performance.

# Code execution

Optional support for executing code embedded in Markdown documents is
provided by Codebraid {cite:p}`codebraid`. Codebraid uses Pandoc to
convert a document into an abstract syntax tree (AST), then extracts any
inline or block code marked with Codebraid attributes from the AST,
executes the code, and finally formats the code output so that Pandoc
can use it to create the final output document. Code execution is
performed with Codebraid’s own built-in system or with Jupyter kernels.
For example, the code block

````
```{.python .cb-run}
print("Hello *world!*")
```
````

would result in

Hello _world!_

after processing by Codebraid and finally Pandoc. The `.cb-run`
is a Codebraid attribute that marks the code block for execution and
specifies the default display of code output. Further examples of
Codebraid usage are visible in {ref}`screenshot`.

Mixing a live preview with executable code provides potential usability
and security challenges. By default, code only runs when the user
selects execution in the VS Code command palette or clicks the Codebraid
execute button. When the preview automatically updates as a result of
Markdown source changes, it only uses cached code output. Stale cached
output is detected by hashing executed code, and then marked in the
preview to alert the user.

The standard approach to executing code within Markdown documents blocks
the document build process until all code has finished running. Code is
extracted from the Markdown source and executed. Then the output is
combined with the original source and passed on to Pandoc or another
Markdown application for final conversion. This is the approach taken by
RMarkdown, Quarto, and similar software, as well as by Codebraid until
recently. This design works well for building a document a single time,
but blocking until all code has executed is not ideal in the context of
a document preview.

Codebraid now offers a new mode of code execution that allows a document
to be rebuilt continuously during code execution, with each build
including all code output available at that time. This process involves
the following steps:

1. The user selects code execution. Codebraid Preview passes the
   document to Codebraid. Codebraid begins code execution.
2. As soon as any code output is available, Codebraid immediately
   streams this back to Codebraid Preview. The output is in a format
   compatible with the YAML metadata block at the start of Pandoc
   Markdown documents. The output includes a hash of the code that was
   executed, so that code changes can be detected later.
3. If the document is modified while code is running or if code output
   is received, Codebraid Preview rebuilds the preview. It creates a
   copy of the document with all current Codebraid output inserted into
   the YAML metadata block at the start of the document. This modified
   document is then passed to Pandoc. Pandoc runs with a Lua filter[^lua-filter] that modifies the document AST before final
   conversion. The filter removes all code marked with Codebraid
   attributes from the AST, and replaces it with the corresponding code
   output stored in the AST metadata. If code has been modified since
   execution began, this is detected with the hash of the code, and an
   HTML class is added to the output that will mark it visually as stale
   output. Code that does not yet have output is replaced by a visible
   placeholder to indicate that code is still running. When the Lua
   filter finishes AST modifications, Pandoc completes the document
   build, and the preview updates.
4. As long as code is executing, the previous process repeats whenever
   the preview needs to be rebuilt.
5. Once code execution completes, the most recent output is reused for
   all subsequent preview updates until the next time the user chooses
   to execute code. Any code changes continue to be detected by hashing
   the code during the build process, so that the output can be marked
   visually as stale in the preview.

[^lua-filter]: For an overview of Lua filters, see <https://pandoc.org/lua-filters.html>.

The overall result of this process is twofold. First, building a
document involving executed code is nearly as fast as building a plain
Pandoc document. The additional output metadata plus the filter are the
only extra elements involved in the document build, and Pandoc Lua
filters have excellent performance. Second, the output for each code
chunk appears in the preview almost immediately after the chunk finishes
execution.

While this build process is significantly more interactive than what has
been possible previously, it also suggests additional avenues for future
exploration. Codebraid’s built-in code execution system is designed to
execute a predefined sequence of code chunks and then exit. Jupyter
kernels are currently used in the same manner to avoid any potential
issues with out-of-order execution. However, Jupyter kernels can receive
and execute code indefinitely, which is how they commonly function in
Jupyter notebooks. Instead of starting a new Jupyter kernel at the
beginning of each code execution cycle, it would be possible to keep the
kernel from the previous execution cycle and only pass modified code
chunks to it. This would allow the same out-of-order execution issues
that are possible in a Jupyter notebook. Yet that would make possible
much more rapid code output, particularly in cases where large datasets
must be loaded or significant preprocessing is required.

# Conclusion

Codebraid Preview represents a significant advance in tools for writing
with Pandoc. For the first time, it is possible to preview a Pandoc
Markdown document using Pandoc itself while having features like scroll
sync between the Markdown source and the preview. When embedded code
needs to be executed, it is possible to see code output in the preview
and to continue editing the document during code execution, instead of
having to wait until code finishes running.

Codebraid Preview or future previewers that follow this approach may be
perfectly adequate for shorter and even some longer documents, but at
some point a combination of document length, document complexity, and
mathematical content will strain what is possible and ultimately
decrease preview update frequency. Every update of the preview involves
converting the entire document with Pandoc and then rendering the
resulting HTML.

On the parsing side, Pandoc’s move toward CommonMark-based Markdown
variants may eventually lead to enough standardization that other
implementations with the same syntax and features are possible. This in
turn might enable entirely new approaches. An ideal scenario would be a
Pandoc-compatible JavaScript-based parser that can parse multiple
Markdown strings while treating them as having a shared document state
for things like labels, references, and numbering. For example, this
could allow Pandoc Markdown within a Jupyter notebook, with all Markdown
content sharing a single document state, maybe with each Markdown cell
being automatically updated based on Markdown changes elsewhere.

Perhaps more practically, on the preview display side, there may be ways
to optimize how the HTML generated by Pandoc is loaded in the preview. A
related consideration might be alternative preview formats. There is a
significant tradition of tight source-preview integration in LaTeX (for
example, {cite}`synctex`). In principle, Pandoc’s `sourcepos`
extension should make possible Markdown to PDF synchronization, using
LaTeX as an intermediary.
