:author: Randy Paffenroth
:email: rcpaffenroth@wpi.edu
:institution: Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Mathematical Sciences Department and Data Science Program

:author: Xiangnan Kong
:email: xkong@wpi.edu
:institution: Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Computer Science Department and Data Science Program

:video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EUEHOYl0mRg

------------------------------------------------
Python in Data Science Research and Education
------------------------------------------------

.. class:: abstract

  In this paper we demonstrate how Python can be used throughout the
  entire life cycle of a graduate program in Data Science.  In
  interdisciplinary fields, such as Data Science, the students often
  come from a variety of different backgrounds where, for example,
  some students may have strong mathematical training but less
  experience in programming.  Python’s ease of use, open source
  license, and access to a vast array of libraries make it
  particularly suited for such students.  In particular, we will
  discuss how Python, IPython notebooks, scikit-learn, NumPy, SciPy,
  and pandas can be used in several phases of graduate Data Science
  education, starting from introductory classes (covering topics such
  as data gathering, data cleaning, statistics, regression,
  classification, machine learning, etc.) and culminating in degree
  capstone research projects using more advanced ideas such as convex
  optimization, non-linear dimension reduction, and compressed
  sensing.  One particular item of note is the scikit-learn library,
  which provides numerous routines for machine learning.  Having
  access to such a library allows interesting problems to be addressed
  early in the educational process and the experience gained with such
  “black box” routines provides a firm foundation for the students own
  software development, analysis, and research later in their academic
  experience.

.. class:: keywords

   data science, education, machine learning

Introduction
------------

Data Science is a burgeoning field of study that lies at the
intersection of statistics, computer science, and numerous applied
scientific domains.  As is common within such *interdisciplinary*
domains of study, Data Science education, mentoring, and research
draws ideas from, and is inspired by, several other domains such as
the mathematical sciences, computer science, and various businesses and
application domains.  Perhaps just as importantly, students who wish to
pursue education and careers in Data Science come from similarly
diverse backgrounds.  Accordingly, the challenges and opportunities of
being an educator in such a domain requires one to reflect on
appropriate tools and approaches that promote educational success.  It
is the authors' view, and experience, that the Python scripting
language can be an effective part of the Data Science curriculum for
several reasons such as its ease of use, its open source license,
and its access to a vast array of libraries covering many topics of
interest to Data Science.

Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) has recently (fall 2014) begun
admitting students into its new Data Science Master's degree program
and, as of spring 2015, has also initiated a Data Science
Ph.D. program.  Even at this early stage, the program has been quite
fortunate to receive many more applications from students then it can
reasonably admit.  The authors have the pleasure of being faculty
members in the program and have the honor of teaching a number of the
courses on offer.  In addition, as long time Python users (for one
of them since 1997 in fact [Paf99]_), the authors were intrigued by
the possibility of leveraging Python in the graduate Data Science
curriculum and this monograph describes some of the experiences, both
successes and challenges, gained from that effort.  Of course, it is
much too early to make any comments on the sustained effect of using
Python for graduate Data Science education, however, perhaps the
reader will find some value in the authors' experiences, even
at this early date.

Of course, we are not the first to suggest Python's effectiveness in
an education and research environment.  In fact, the Python
scripting language is quite popular in numerous problem domains and
Python has seen wide used in education, see e.g., [Mye07]_ and
[Sta00]_.  In fact, it ranks quite highly in many surveys of
programming language popularity [OGr14]_, it is seeing substantial
growth within the Data Science community [Sin14]_, and is generally
speaking quite easy to learn [Lut13]_.

However, it is not our purpose here to focus on Python in general,
but rather to focus on its use in *Data Science* education and
research.  With that in mind, herein we will focus on a small number
of case studies that provide insights into how we have leveraged
Python in that domain.

In particular, herein we will discuss the use of Python at three
different levels of Data Science education and research.  First, one
of the courses that is offered as part of our Data Science curriculum,
and in which the authors and others have leveraged Python, is DS501
|--| "Introduction to Data Science".  The idea of DS501 is to provide
an introductory overview of the many fields that comprise Data Science
and it is intended that DS501 be one of the first classes a new
student takes when entering the program.  Second, one of the
authors has also used Python to support MA542 |--| "Regression
Analysis".  MA542 is a somewhat more advanced class that is a (core)
elective in the Data Science program as well as being a class taken by
many students who are seeking degrees in the Mathematical Sciences
department.  Finally, the authors mentor a number of students'
research projects within the Data Science Program, the
Mathematical Sciences Department, and the Computer Science Department.
Many of these research projects leverage Python in various ways, and
having access to a common code base allows the various student
projects to build off of one another.

Two key themes will permeate our discussion in the following sections.
First, the Python community provides easy access to a vast
array of libraries.  Even though Data Science education and research
draws from many other domains, Python was always there with a library
ready to support our work.  Second, and perhaps more subtly, having
access to a language which is easy to use, but provides access to many
advanced libraries, allows one to carefully craft the difficulty and
scope of homework assignments, class projects, and research problems.
In particular, Python allows students to tackle specific aspects of
real world problems, without being overly burdened with details that
are extraneous to their particular learning objectives.  Both
properties make Python particularly advantageous.

Finally, in an effort to assist the reader who is not steeped in
Python, we will attempt to provide a range of references so that the
interested reader can learn more about the specific libraries we
leverage in our work.  While in certain circles the libraries we
mention are well known, we thought it would be useful to collect these
references together into a single document.

DS501 Introduction to Data Science
----------------------------------

DS501 |--| "Introduction to Data Science" is intended to be one of the
first classes a new student takes when entering the Data Science
program at WPI, and the goal is to provide a high level overview of a
wide swath of the material that a burgeoning Data Scientist should know.
In particular, the course is described as:

.. raw:: latex  
 
  \begin{quotation} 

    This course provides an overview of Data Science, covering a broad
    selection of key challenges in and methodologies for working with
    big data. Topics to be covered include data collection,
    integration, management, modeling, analysis, visualization,
    prediction and informed decision making, as well as data security
    and data privacy. This introductory course is integrative across
    the core disciplines of Data Science, including databases, data
    warehousing, statistics, data mining, data visualization, high
    performance computing, cloud computing, and business
    intelligence. Professional skills, such as communication,
    presentation, and storytelling with data, will be
    fostered. Students will acquire a working knowledge of data
    science through hands-on projects and case studies in a variety of
    business, engineering, social sciences, or life sciences
    domains. Issues of ethics, leadership, and teamwork are
    highlighted. --
    {\footnotesize http://www.wpi.edu/academics/catalogs/grad/dscourses.html}

  \end{quotation}

As one might imagine from such an ambitious description, finding the
right level of detail for the course can be quite challenging.  One
must consider the fact that many of the students have quite varied
backgrounds.  Some students are experts in mathematics and have less
training in computer science or software development, while others
find themselves in the opposite situation.

Space does not allow for a fulsome description of the class content
and, in any event, such a discussion would distract us from our focus
on Python.  However, in the authors' view, one important feature of
such a class is that the students should be able to *get "their hands
dirty" playing with real data* both early and often.  Students can
often find inspiration by seeing the ideas developed as part of the
lectures being  put to use on problems of practical interest.

With all of the above in mind, it was decided to have four
interconnected *case studies* as major learning activities
for the class.  Each case study is intended to build upon the previous
one with the students solving interesting and pertinent problems in
Data Science at every step.  Accordingly, our focus here will be on
these case studies and the substantial role that Python had to play in
their development.

Case Study One
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The idea of the first case study in DS501 is to perform basic data
gathering, cleaning, and collection of statistics.  For this case
study we choose our data source to be the Twitter Data Streaming API
[Rus13]_ [Twi15]_.  Already, Python begins to demonstrate its
usefulness, since it allows ready access to the Twitter API through
the python-twitter library [Ptw15]_.

Another key feature of the case studies in DS501 is that we chose to
use IPython notebooks [Per07]_ both to provide the assignments to the
students and to have the students submit their results.  Using IPython
notebooks for both of these tasks provided a number of advantages.
First and foremost, it let the instructors provide the students
with skeleton implementations of their assignments and allowed the
students to focus on their learning objectives.  Second, it provide a
uniform and easy to use development environment for the students'
efforts.  As DS501 is not a programming class, per se, leveraging
IPython notebooks made the introduction of Python to those students
unfamiliar with it substantially easier.

For example, in the IPython notebooks we are able to provide code
examples to get the students started with their development work.  For
example, we could provide code similar to the following as a launching
pad for their efforts (see [Twi15]_ for details and code example is
based upon [Rus13]_):

.. code-block:: python

   import twitter
   #---------------------------------------------
   
   # Define a Function to Login Twitter API
   def oauth_login():
       # Go to http://twitter.com/apps/new to create an 
       # app and get values for these credentials that 
       # you'll need to provide in place of these empty 
       # string values that are defined as placeholders.  
       # See https://dev.twitter.com/docs/auth/oauth 
       # for more information on Twitter's OAuth 
       # implementation.
    
       CONSUMER_KEY = '<Insert your key>'
       CONSUMER_SECRET ='<Insert your key>'
       OAUTH_TOKEN = '<Insert your token>'
       OAUTH_TOKEN_SECRET = '<Insert your token>'
    
       auth = twitter.oauth.OAuth(OAUTH_TOKEN, 
		                  OAUTH_TOKEN_SECRET,
                                  CONSUMER_KEY, 
                                  CONSUMER_SECRET)
    
       twitter_api = twitter.Twitter(auth=auth)
       return twitter_api

   #----------------------------------------------
   # Your code starts here
   # Please add comments or text cells in between 
   # to explain the general idea of each block of the 
   # code.  Please feel free to add more cells below 
   # this cell if necessary.

In this example we provide a skeleton that allows the students to
focus on the objective of analyzing tweets and hashtags with frequency
analysis and not have to struggle with the details of Twitter
authentication.  Using Python, and the skeleton code provided by the
instructors, the student were able to gather and analyze many
thousands of tweets and learn important lessons about data gathering,
data APIs, data storage, and basic analytics.

Case Study Two
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Building upon the skills gained in the first case study, the second
case study asks the students to analyze the MovieLens 1M Data Set
[Mov15]_, which contains data about how users rate movies.  The key
learning objectives are to analyze the data set, make conjectures,
support or refute those conjectures with data, and use the data to
tell a compelling story.  In particular, the students are not only asked to
perform several technical tasks, but they must also propose a business
question that they think this data can answer.  In effect, they are
expected to play the role of a Data Scientist at a movie company and
they must convince "upper management", who are not presumed to be
technically minded, that their conjecture is correct.
    
While a seemingly tall order for only the second case study, Python
again shows its utility.  In particular, just as in case study 1, the
assignment is provided in an IPython notebook, and the student is
required to submit their work in the same format, thereby leveraging
the skills learned in the first case study.

However, in this case study we introduce several important Python
libraries that support Data Science including Numpy [Wal11]_,
matplotlib [Hun07]_, and, perhaps most importantly, pandas [McK10]_.
As is perhaps well known to the readers of this text, Numpy provides a
vast selection of routines for numerical processing, including
powerful array and matrix/vector classes, while matplotlib allows for
plotting of data and generation of compelling figures.  Finally,
pandas provides many tools for data processing, including a structure
called a DataFrame (inspired by a data structure with the same name in
the R language [RCT13]_), which facilitates many data manipulations.  Note,
we are certainly not the first to consider this collection of
libraries to be important for Data Science, and this particular case
study was inspired by the excellent book "Python for Data Analysis:
Data Wrangling with Pandas, NumPy, and IPython", by Wes McKinney
[McK12]_ (which is required reading for this particular assignment).

Many of the tasks in this case study revolve around question like:

* How many movies have an average rating over 4.5 overall?
* How many movies have an average rating over 4.5 among men?  How
  about women?
* How many movies have a *median* rating over 4.5 among men over age
  30?  How about women over age 30?
* What are the ten most popular movies given a reasonable, student 
  derived, definition of "popular"?

and the visualization of the data by way of:

* Plotting a histogram of the ratings of all movies.
* Plotting a histogram of the *number* of ratings each movie received.
* Plotting a histogram of the *average rating* for each movie.
* Plotting a histogram of the *average rating* for movies which are rated
  more than 100 times.
* Making a scatter plot of men versus women and their mean rating for
  every movie.
* Making a scatter plot of men versus women and their mean rating for
  movies rated more than 200 times.

Note, there are a number of important learning objectives that we wish
to support.  First, several terms are, intentionally, only vaguely
defined in the assignment.  For example, the precise definition of
"popular" is left to the student to derive.  As is often the case is
real world Data Science, one of the key first steps of analysis is to
decide precisely what the question of interest is. Second, the student
is expected to make hypotheses or conjectures based upon the
definitions they come up with.  For example, the student might
conjecture that men's and women's rating for certain genres are highly
correlated, while for other genres their ratings more independent.
Finally, the students must try to either prove, or just as
interestingly, disprove their conjectures based upon the data.  

Diving a bit more deeply into some of the specific functionality that
we leverage in Python, we note that pandas [McK10]_ is particularly
useful for these kinds of data analysis questions.  In particular, to
any Python aficionado, it is likely to be clear that there are many
ways to process the data to answer the questions above, ranging from
the brute force to the elegant.

To begin, we note that the MovieLens 1M Data Set itself is actually
provided in three different files.  First is a file containing the
information regarding individual users, indexed by a unique *user_id*.
Second is a file containing the information regarding each movie,
indexed by a unique *movie_id*.  Finally, and perhaps most
importantly, is a file which contains ratings (and time stamps)
indexed by a pair of *user_id* and *movie_id*.

Already we can perceive a thorny issue.  Clearly, the questions of
interest can only be answered by appropriate cross referencing between
these three files.  For example, all three files must be referenced to
answer a question as seemingly straight forward as "how many action
movies do men rate higher than 4?"  While perhaps not too troublesome
for students who are adept programmers, the cross referencing between
the files presents an unnecessary impediment to less proficient
students and overcoming this sort of impediment does not support the
learning goals for this assignment.

Of course, a straightforward answer would be for the instructors to
preprocess the data appropriately.  However, using the power of Python
one can easily arm the students with a general tool, while at the same
time avoiding unnecessary hurdles.  In particular, pandas has a merge
function [PMe15]_ that provides exactly the required functionality in
a quite general framework.  In particular, one can use the code below
to easily merge the three data files into a single DataFrame.

.. code-block:: python

   import pandas as pd
   #---------------------------------------------

   # Read in the user data into a DataFrame
   unames = ['user_id', 'gender', 'age', 
             'occupation', 'zip']
   users = pd.read_table('ml-1m/users.dat', 
                         sep='::', header=None,
			 names=unames) 

   # Read in the rating data into a DataFrame
   rnames = ['user_id', 'movie_id', 
             'rating', 'timestamp']
   ratings = pd.read_table('ml-1m/ratings.dat', 
                           sep='::', header=None,
			   names=rnames)

   # Read in the movie data into a Data Frame
   mnames = ['movie_id', 'title', 'genres']
   movies = pd.read_table('ml-1m/movies.dat', 
		          sep='::', header=None,
			  names=mnames)

   # Merge all the data into one DataFrame
   data = pd.merge(pd.merge(ratings, 
                            users), 
                   movies)

Of course, even once the data files have been merged, there are many
places where a student might fall astray.  Fortunately, pandas
provides another tool which allows for elegant and compact code,
namely the *pivot-table*.  For example, one can imagine writing
complicated loops and conditionals to perform the task of printing
out all movies that have a median rating of 5 by men or women.
However, using pivot-tables, such a question can be answered with
just three lines of code (using the Python 2 "print" statement versus
the Python 3 "print()" function):

.. code-block:: python

   # Create a pivot table to aggregate the data
   mean_ratings = data[data['age'] > 30].\
	pivot_table(values='rating', 
		    rows='title', 
		    cols='gender', 
		    aggfunc='median')
   # Only print out movies with at least one rating
   print (mean_ratings[mean_ratings['M'].notnull()].\
        sort('M',ascending=False)['M'] > 4.5).nonzero()
   print (mean_ratings[mean_ratings['F'].notnull()].\
        sort('F',ascending=False)['F'] > 4.5).nonzero()

Of course, one might be tempted to argue that having students develop
their own code, rather than leveraging such *black box* routines leads
to a deeper learning experience.  While we certainly appreciate this
point of view, we wish to emphasize that the class in question is an
introductory Data Science class, and not a programming or data
structure class.  Accordingly, using Python, and the powerful features
of libraries such as Pandas, allows us to focus on the Data Science
learning goals, while at the same time allowing the students to
utilize large scale, real world, and sometimes messy data sources.
This theme of using Python to allow for focused learning goals, using
real world data, is a key message of this text.


Case Study Three
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The third case study is substantially more challenging than the second
case study, but builds on the foundations already laid down.  While
case study two focused on analyzing *numerical* movie reviews, case study
three focuses on detecting positive and negative reviews from raw text
using natural language processing.

In particular, in case study three, the class turns its attention to the
Movie Review Data v2.0 from 
http://www.cs.cornell.edu/people/pabo/movie-review-data.  This data
set contains written reviews of movies divided into positive and
negative reviews, and the goal is to learn how to automatically
distinguish between the two cases.

Of course, tackling such problems is well known to be difficult, and
there are many open research problems in this domain.  On the other
hand, such problems are clearly of importance in many domains, and it
is not at all difficult to get students interested in solving them.
The question remains, how can students in their very first Data
Science class be expected to approach such difficult and important
problems, and still be able to make meaningful progress?  Of course,
the answer is, again, Python.

In particular, we base this case study on the excellent scikit-learn
[Ped11]_ Python library.  Scikit-learn provides easy to use and
efficient tools for data analysis.  Most importantly, it provides
routines for many important Data Science concepts such as machine
learning, cross validation, etc.  In fact, this case study is inspired
by the scikit-learn tutorial "Working With Text Data" which can be
found at
http://scikit-learn.org/stable/tutorial/text_analytics/working_with_text_data.html.

Following our theme of leveraging Python to quickly get to interesting
Data Science problems, the students in case study three are
encouraged to start their work based upon various examples provided in
the scikit-learn library.  In particular, the students leverage the
exercise_02_sentiment.py files from the directories:

* doc/tutorial/text_analytics/skeletons/ 
* doc/tutorial/text_analytics/solutions/ 

One version of the file is merely a skeleton of a natural language
processing example, while the other contains the full source code.

For DS501 there are two key learning goals for this case study.
First, the students need to derive *features* from the raw text that
they feel would be useful in predicting positive and negative
sentiments.  Second, they must make predictions by processing these
features using a variety of supervised machine learning algorithms.

Feature Generation
******************

Classically, rather than attempting to do machine learning on raw
text, Data Science practitioners will first process the raw text to
derive features for downstream processing.  A detailed description of
text feature generation is beyond the scope of the current text (the
interested reader may see [Raj11]_, and references therein, for more
details).  However, Python and scikit-learn [Ped11]_ provide easy
access to the exact functionality required by the students by way of
the TfidVectorizer class which implements the term frequency–inverse
document frequency (TF-IDF) statistic [Raj11]_.  For our purposes we
merely observe that there are several parameters that the student can
explore to get a feel for feature generation from raw text, including
*min_df* and *max_df* parameters (which control thresholds on document
frequencies) and ngram_range (which controls how many words are
conglomerated into a single token).  Experimenting with these
parameters provide many important insights for feature generation from
real world text data, not the least of which is that large values of
ngram_range may take a long time to run.

Supervised Machine Learning
***************************

Now, given a collection of reviews, each represented by a set of
features sometimes called *predictors*, one can imagine many
interesting problems.  For example, a classic problem in machine
learning involves using a set of reviews which have appropriate labels
(in this case positive or negative) to *predict* labels of other
reviews which do not already have labels.  This process is called
*supervised* machine learning.  The idea is that the labeled data is
used to *supervise* the training of an algorithm which, after training,
can attempt to compute labels just from the raw features.  Again,
supervised machine learning is a vast subject, and space does not
allow us to treat the subject even at the more superficial level here
(the interested read may see [Fri01]_ [Jam13]_ [Bis06]_, and
references therein, for more details).  However, we will note that
scikit-learn provides functions and classes for many standard
algorithms, allowing the students to become familiar with important
machine learning and Data Science concepts, without being expected to
have too many prerequisites.  For example, scikit-learn provides
access to classic and powerful algorithms such as K-nearest neighbors,
support vector classifiers, and principal component analysis [Fri01]_
[Jam13]_ [Bis06]_.

Using such routines, several important learning objectives can be
supported, such as error estimation, by way of techniques such as
cross-validation and confusion matrices.  In fact, one particularly
effective learning experience revolved around the following challenge.
Using their favorite technique the student is asked to find a two
dimensional plot of the data where the positive and negative reviews
are separated.  While easy to state, practitioners of natural language
processing will recognize that actually solving the problem is
exceptionally difficult, and the instructors admit that they are not
in possession of an actual solution.  For some students this may be
the first time they have been presented with a problem they are
expected to tackle for which their instructor *does not know the
solution*.  The student's ability to begin thinking about such open
problems so early in their Data Science career is substantially
supported by a language such as Python and the libraries it provides.


Case Study Four
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The final case study, and in some sense the capstone of the class,
revolves around the Yelp Dataset Challenge
http://www.yelp.com/dataset_challenge.  This case study involves a
large data set with approximately 42,153 business, 252,898 users, and
1,125,458 reviews in Phoenix, Las Vegas, Madison, Waterloo and
Edinburgh.

Again, building off of the previous case studies, the students are
expected to process the data, generate statistics, process reviews
using TfidVectorizer, etc.  However, for this case study the students
are also expected to process the data using MapReduce [Dea08]_.  As is
well known in certain circles, MapReduce is a programming model (with
various implementations) for distributed processing of large scale
data sets. Distributed processing models, and MapReduce in particular,
are essential elements of modern Data Science and we would have felt
remiss if students in a class such as DS501 were not able to
experience, at least at some level, the beauty and power of such
methods.

Fortunately, and we fear that we are repeating ourselves, Python
provides precisely the functionality we required.  In particular,
there are several MapReduce interfaces for Python, and the mrjob
package [MrJ15]_ was chosen to support the students learning
objectives.  This package is especially useful in a classroom
environment since it can be used locally on a single computer (for
testing) and in a cluster environment.  Accordingly, the students can
learn about MapReduce with the need for access to large scale
computing resources.

Introductory Data Science: Final Thoughts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Of course, Python is not the only choice for an Introductory Data
Science course.  For example, the scripting language R [RCT13]_ is
also a popular choice which has also used successfully in the Data
Science curriculum.  In particular, R offers much, if not all, of the
functionality mentioned above, including interfaces to MapReduce
[Usu14]_.  Accordingly, the choice of language for such a class may be
considered a matter of taste.

However, there is mounting evidence of Python's growing popularity
within the Data Science community [Sin14]_ and the software
development community at large [OGr14]_.  Perhaps, if we may be
forgiven a small measure of Python bias, we will merely emphasize that
Python's popularity cuts across many problem domains.  For example,
the authors are not aware of any customer relationship management
applications, system administration tools, or web servers [#]_, to
name just a handful of areas outside of statistical and data analysis,
currently being developed in R, nor many other domains in which Python
has made inroads.  The fact that Python is as generally applicable as
it is, while perhaps still being just as popular as R for Data
Science, is a testament to its advantages.

.. [#] We would be remiss not to at least mention the quite beautiful
       R web application framework Shiny [Shi14]_.  However, we believe
       our point still stands.

MA542 Regression Analysis
-------------------------

Leaving aside introductory classes, we now make brief mention of
Python's usefulness in more advanced classes.  In particular, one of
the authors recently taught a Regression Analysis class (using the text
*Applied linear regression models* [Kut04]_), for the first time, with
all of the development in the class being Python focused.  Regression
Analysis is a more advanced class with a greater concentration of
mathematically focused students who take the class.  In addition, many
students were first time Python users, with the majority of the
exceptions being Data Science students who had taken DS501 |--|
"Introduction to Data Science" previously.

Just as in DS501, Numpy [Wal11]_, matplotlib
[Hun07]_, and pandas [McK10]_ provided almost all of the functionality
the students required for the learning objectives in the class.  Also
as in DS501, the instructor can use Python and its vast array of
libraries to carefully control the difficulty and scope of
assignments.  In fact, one of the challenges in this class was that
Python perhaps does *too good* of a job providing functionality to the
students.

In particular, Python provides so many libraries that, for example,
many of the computationally oriented homework questions are trivially
answerable if the students look hard enough.  Accordingly, as an
instructor, one needs to be careful that the ground rules are set
correctly so that the learning objectives are achieved.  For example,
if the learning objective is for the student to understand the details
of a particular mathematical concept, say the *normal equations*,
rather than just a numerical procedure, such as *linear regression*
on a particular data set, then the expectations for the assignment need
to be carefully delineated.  

Accordingly, to maintain the integrity of the learning objectives, a
tactic used by the authors was to carefully delineate what parts of
the assignment are allowed to be Python "black boxes" and which parts
must be hand coded.  In addition, we require the students to hand in
their Python code, even though the code itself is *not* graded.  The
learning objectives of the class are mathematical, and not
programming.  Accordingly, the quality of the implementations is not a
focus.  However, having access to the code allows the instructor to
verify that the desired learning objectives are being met.

As one final note, one tactic that was quite successful was to
encourage the students to check their hand coded results against those
provided by any black box routine they are able to use.  It was quite
useful for the students in debugging their own implementations and
understanding of the mathematical concepts.  It was quite empowering
for the students when their answers would exactly match those of the
black box.  They then appreciated that they understood, in a deep way,
what the "professionals" were doing.

Student research projects and theses
------------------------------------

Python has had an important part to play in the authors' research since
1997 [Paf99]_.  Currently, we perform research involving, and mentor
students in, several topics revolving around semi-supervised and
unsupervised machine learning applied to several different domains,
with a focus on cyber-defense (see, for example, [Paf13]_).
Accordingly, one of our key goals is to support the training of the
next generation of researchers in these domains.  We will not burden
the reader with the mathematical details of our research directions, but
just observe that our work, and the work of our students, draws from a
laundry list of ideas from mathematics, statistics, and Data Science,
including convex optimization [Boy04]_, deep learning [Den14]_,
graphical models [Lau96]_, and scientific visualization [War10]_.

For the current purpose, it is merely important to note that Python
libraries are available that support *all of these subject areas*.  For
example, we have:

* Statistical modeling:  Statsmodels [StM15]_
* Convex optimization:  cvxopt [Dah06]_, CVXPY [Dia14]_
* Deep learning:  Theano [Ber11]_
* Graphical models:  libpgm [Kar14]_, pgmpy [Pgm15]_
* Scientific visualization:  Mayavi [Ram11]_, Matplotlib [Hun07]_, Bokeh [Bok15]_, Seaborn [Was14]_

Accordingly, students who are trained in classes such as DS501 and
MA542 can leverage that training to get a running start on their
research subjects.  Perhaps this is the single biggest advantage of
using a language such as Python from the earliest stages of Data
Science education.  In addition to being easy to learn [Lut13]_, and
providing access to many libraries that support Data Science
education, Python provides ready access to a broad swath of cutting
edge Data Science research.

We use all of these libraries in our work, where we are especially
interested in large scale robust principle component analysis [Can11]_
[Paf13]_ and non-linear dimension reduction problems [Lee07]_.  These
problem domains are mathematically subtle, computationally intensive,
and lead to, in the authors' opinion, rather intriguing visualization
problems, which are also supported by Python through libraries such as
Mayavi, as shown in the figure below.

.. figure:: WPI3D.png
   :align: center

   An example of a 3D visualization of a manifold using Mayavi
   [Ram11]_.  In our work we attempt to detect the non-linear
   dependencies in such data, even when the data is noisy and unevenly
   distributed.  In this synthetic example we see data which is
   intrinsically two-dimensional (since it is a flat surface) embedded
   in a three-dimensional space.  The two-dimensional structure is
   non-trivial to detect based upon the non-linear nature of the data,
   noise, and regions with no data points.

Beyond the mathematical research that Python supports, there are a
vast array of computational resources that are at the fingertips of
those well versed in Python.  For example, our research group is
interested in developing algorithms for modern distributed
supercomputers that leverage GPUs to accelerate computations.  Again,
Python displays its usefulness with the pycuda [Klo12]_ and mpi4py
[Dal08]_ libraries.

As one can see, Python is an effective tool for cutting edge Data
Science research.  Of course, there are many such tools, and often the
specific choice of language for Data Science research is a matter of
taste.  However, we would respectfully submit that few languages have
the broad range of support for Data Science research that Python
provides.

Conclusion
----------

We have discussed how Python can be used throughout the entire life
cycle of a graduate program in Data Science.  Python is easy to learn
and use, but it also provides access to a vast array of libraries for
cutting edge Data Science research.  In particular, IPython notebooks,
scikit-learn, NumPy, SciPy, and pandas can be used to support many
aspects of the Data Science education.  These libraries allow
instructors to focus on desired learning objectives, while leaving
many of the less important details to the libraries.  Having access to
such libraries allow interesting problems to be addressed early in the
educational process and the experience gained with such Python
libraries supports the student's own software development,
analysis, and research throughout their academic career and beyond.

Acknowledgments 
---------------- 

We wish to gratefully acknowledge several people without whom this
monograph would not have been possible. In particular, the authors are
deeply grateful to the other members of Data Science Steering
Committee at WPI:

* Prof. Elke Angelika Rundensteiner (Director of Data Science)
* Prof. Mohamed Eltabakh
* Prof. Eleanor T. Loiacono
* Prof. Joseph D. Petruccelli
* Prof. Carolina Ruiz
* Prof. Diane M. Strong
* Prof. Andrew C. Trapp
* Prof. Domokos Vermes
* Prof. Jian Zou

without whose tireless efforts the WPI Data Science program would not
be what it is today.

References
----------
.. cython
.. [Beh11] Stefan Behnel, Robert Bradshaw, Craig Citro, Lisandro
           Dalcin, Dag Sverre Seljebotn and Kurt Smith. *Cython: The
           Best of Both Worlds*, Computing in Science and Engineering,
           13, 31-39 (2011), DOI:10.1109/MCSE.2010.118

.. [Ber11] Bergstra, James, et al. *Theano: Deep learning on gpus with python*. 
	   NIPS 2011, BigLearning Workshop, Granada, Spain. 2011.
	   http://deeplearning.net/software/theano/
	   [Online; accessed 2015-06-08].

.. [Bis06] Bishop, Christopher M. *Pattern recognition and machine learning*. 
	   Springer, 2006.

.. [Bok15] *Bokeh* (2015), 
	   http://bokeh.pydata.org/en/latest/
	   [Online; accessed 2015-06-17].

.. [Boy04] Boyd, Stephen, and Lieven Vandenberghe. *Convex optimization*. 
	   Cambridge university press, 2004.

.. [Can11] Candès, Emmanuel J., Li, Xiaodong, Ma, Yi, and Wright, John.
	   *Robust principal component analysis?*. 
	   Journal of the ACM (JACM) 58.3 (2011): 11.

.. [Dah06] Dahl, Joachin, and Lieven Vandenberghe. 
	   *Cvxopt: A python package for convex optimization.* 
	   Proc. eur. conf. op. res. 2006.
	   http://cvxopt.org
	   [Online; accessed 2015-06-08].
	   
.. [Dal08] Dalcín, Lisandro, Paz, Rodrigo, Storti, Mario, and D’Elía, Jorge (2008). *MPI
           for Python: Performance improvements and MPI-2
           extensions*. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing,
           68(5), 655-662.

.. [Dea08] Dean, Jeffrey, and Sanjay Ghemawat. *MapReduce: simplified 
	   data processing on large clusters*.
	   Communications of the ACM 51.1 (2008): 107-113.

.. [Den14] Deng, Li, and Dong Yu. *Deep learning: methods and applications*. 
	   Foundations and Trends in Signal Processing 7.3–4 (2014): 197-387.

.. [Dia14] Diamond, Steven, Eric Chu, and Stephen Boyd. 
	   *CVXPY: A Python-embedded modeling language for convex optimization*, 
	   version 0.2." (2014).
	   http://cvxpy.org
	   [Online; accessed 2015-06-08].

.. [Fri01] Friedman, Jerome, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani. 
	   *The elements of statistical learning*. Vol. 1. Springer, 
	   Berlin: Springer series in statistics, 2001.

.. [Jam13] James, Gareth, et al. *An introduction to statistical learning*. 
	   New York: springer, 2013.

.. matplotlib
.. [Hun07] John D. Hunter. *Matplotlib: A 2D Graphics Environment*,
           Computing in Science & Engineering, 9, 90-95 (2007),
           DOI:10.1109/MCSE.2007.55

.. [Kar14] Karkera, Kiran R. *Building Probabilistic Graphical Models with Python*. 
	   Packt Publishing Ltd, 2014.

.. [Klo12] Andreas Klöckner, Nicolas Pinto, Yunsup Lee, Bryan
	   Catanzaro, Paul Ivanov, Ahmed Fasih, *PyCUDA and PyOpenCL:
	   A scripting-based approach to GPU run-time code
	   generation*, Parallel Computing, Volume 38, Issue 3, March
	   2012, Pages 157-174.

.. [Kut04] Kutner, Michael H., Chris Nachtsheim, and John Neter. 
           *Applied linear regression models*. McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2004.

.. [Lau96] Lauritzen, Steffen L. *Graphical models*. Oxford University Press, 1996.

.. [Lee07] Lee, John A., and Michel Verleysen. *Nonlinear dimensionality reduction*. 
	   Springer Science & Business Media, 2007.

.. python
.. [Lut13] Lutz, Mark. *Programming python*. 5th edition, O'Reilly
           Media, Inc., 2010.

.. pandas
.. [McK10] McKinney, Wes. *Data Structures for Statistical Computing in
           Python*, Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science
           Conference, 51-56 (2010) 

.. [McK12] McKinney, Wes. *Python for data analysis: Data wrangling 
	   with Pandas, NumPy, and IPython* .O'Reilly Media, Inc., 2012.

.. [PMe15] *Merge, join, and concatenate* 
	   (2015), http://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/merging.html
	   [Online; accessed 2015-06-08].

.. scientific computing in python
.. [Mil11] K. Jarrod Millman and Michael Aivazis. *Python for
           Scientists and Engineers, Computing in Science &
           Engineering*, 13, 9-12 (2011), DOI:10.1109/MCSE.2011.36

.. [Mov15] *MovieLens* 
	   (2015), http://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/
	   [Online; accessed 2015-06-08].

.. [MrJ15] *mrjob* 
	   (2015), https://pythonhosted.org/mrjob/
	   [Online; accessed 2015-06-08].

.. python for education
.. [Mye07] Myers, Christopher R., and James P. Sethna. *Python for
	   education: Computational methods for nonlinear systems.*
	   Computing in Science & Engineering 9.3 (2007): 75-79.

.. [OGr14] O'Grady, Stephen. *The RedMonk Programming Language Rankings: January 2014* 
	   (2014), http://redmonk.com/sogrady/2014/01/22/language-rankings-1-14/
	   [Online; accessed 2015-06-08].

.. scipy
.. [Oli01] Jones, Erid, Oliphant, Travis, Peterson, Pearu, et al. *SciPy: Open Source
           Scientific Tools for Python*, 2001-, http://www.scipy.org/
           [Online; accessed 2015-05-31].

.. scientific computing in python
.. [Oli07] Travis E. Oliphant. *Python for Scientific Computing*,
           Computing in Science & Engineering, 9, 10-20 (2007),
           DOI:10.1109/MCSE.2007.58

.. [Paf99] Paffenroth, Randy C. *VBM and MCCC: Packages for objected 
	   oriented visualization and computation of bifurcation 
	   manifolds.* Object Oriented Methods for Interoperable 
	   Scientific and Engineering Computing: Proceedings of the 
	   1998 SIAM Workshop. Vol. 99. SIAM, 1999.

.. [Paf13] Paffenroth, Randy, Du Toit, Philip, Nong, Ryan, Scharf, Louis,
	   Jayasumana, Anura. P., and Bandara, Vidarshana. (2013). *Space-time
	   signal processing for distributed pattern detection in
	   sensor networks*. Selected Topics in Signal Processing,
	   IEEE Journal of, 7(1), 38-49.  Chicago

.. sklearn
.. [Ped11] Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort,
           Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu
           Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg,
           Jake Vanderplas, Alexandre Passos, David Cournapeau,
           Matthieu Brucher, Matthieu Perrot, Édouard
           Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python,
           Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12, 2825-2830 (2011)

.. ipython
.. [Per07] Fernando Pérez and Brian E. Granger. IPython: A System for
           Interactive Scientific Computing, Computing in Science &
           Engineering, 9, 21-29 (2007), DOI:10.1109/MCSE.2007.53

.. [Pgm15] *Python Library for Probabilistic Graphical Models (pgmpy)* 
	   (2015), https://github.com/pgmpy/pgmpy
	   [Online; accessed 2015-06-24].

.. [Ptw15] *Python Twitter* 
	   (2015), https://code.google.com/p/python-twitter/
	   [Online; accessed 2015-06-08].

.. [Raj11]  Rajaraman, Anand and Jeffrey David Ullman. *Data Mining*, 
	   Mining of Massive Datasets. 
	   1st ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011. pp. 1-17. 
	   Cambridge Books Online. 
	   http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139058452.002
	   [Online; accessed 2015-06-08].

.. mayavi
.. [Ram11] Ramachandran, Prabhu and Varoquaux, Gael, *Mayavi: 3D
           Visualization of Scientific Data* IEEE Computing in Science
           & Engineering, 13 (2), pp. 40-51 (2011)

.. [RCT13] R Core Team (2013). R: A language and environment for statistical
	   computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.
	   http://www.R-project.org/.

.. [Rus13] Russell, Matthew A. *Mining the Social Web: Data Mining Facebook, 
	   Twitter, LinkedIn, Google+, GitHub, and More*. O'Reilly Media, Inc., 2013.

.. [Shi14] RStudio, Inc. *shiny:  Easy web applications in R* (2014), 
	   http://shiny.rstudio.com
	   [Online; accessed 2015-06-08].

.. [Sin14] Singh, Harpreet. *Is Python Becoming the King of the Data Science Forest?* 
	   (2014), http://www.experfy.com/blog/python-data-science/
	   [Online; accessed 2015-06-08].

.. education
.. [Sta00] Stajano, Frank. *Python in education: Raising a generation
	   of native speakers.* Proceedings of 8th International
	   Python Conference. 2000.

.. [StM15] *Statsmodels* 
	   (2015), http://statsmodels.sourceforge.net/
	   [Online; accessed 2015-06-17].

.. [Twi15] *The Streaming APIs Overview* (2015), 
	   https://dev.twitter.com/streaming/overview 
	   [Online; accessed 2015-06-08].

.. [Usu14] Usuelli, Michele. *An Example of MapReduce with rmr2* (2014), 
	   http://www.milanor.net/blog/?p=853
	   [Online; accessed 2015-06-08].

.. numpy and scipy
.. [Wal11] Stéfan van der Walt, S. Chris Colbert and Gaël
           Varoquaux. *The NumPy Array: A Structure for Efficient
           Numerical Computation*, Computing in Science & Engineering,
           13, 22-30 (2011), DOI:10.1109/MCSE.2011.37

.. [War10] Ward, Matthew, Georges Grinstein, and Daniel Keim. 
	   *Interactive Data Visualization: Foundations, Techniques, and Applications*, 
	   AK Peters, Ltd., Natick, MA (2010).

.. [Was14] Waskom, Michael et al.. (2014). *seaborn: v0.5.0* (November
           2014). Zenodo. 10.5281/zenodo.12710

